Trainable segmentation (#1)
eoss-image-processing/eoss-image-processing.github.io: _posts/2020-06-24-trainable-segmentation.markdown

---
layout: post
title:  "Trainable image segmentation using Dash, scikit-image and scikit-learn"
date:   2020-06-23
author:	Nicholas Esterer and Emmanuelle Gouillart
categories: jekyll update
---

**TL; DR**: checkout [our new image processing app performing interactive image
segmentation](https://dash-gallery.plotly.host/dash-image-segmentation/)! Its
[source code can be found on Github](https://github.com/plotly/dash-sample-apps/tree/master/apps/dash-image-segmentation).

![animation showing the annotation of an image and the resulting segmentation](/assets/segmentation_cut.gif)

[Image segmentation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_segmentation) is the

> process of partioning an image into multiple objects. It is a classical image
> processing task in various fields of science and technology. There exists a
> very large number of possible strategies for image segmentation, as exemplified
> by the [scikit-image gallery of examples on segmentation](https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/auto_examples/#segmentation-of-objects). However, a wide class of segmentation methods relies on machine learning and deep learning, where an algorithm uses a *training set* of already labeled pixels to determine the class of unlabeled pixels. In this setting the image segmentation task boils down to a [classification](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistical_classification) task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process of partitioning an image into multiple objects. It is a classical image
processing task in various fields of science and technology. There are many possible strategies for image segmentation, as exemplified
by the [scikit-image gallery of examples on segmentation](https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/auto_examples/#segmentation-of-objects). However, a large class of segmentation methods relies on machine learning and deep learning, where an algorithm uses a *training set* of already labeled pixels to determine the class of unlabeled pixels. In this setting the image segmentation task boils down to a [classification](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistical_classification) task.
```

We have built a simple [Dash app](https://dash.plotly.com/) to train a machine learning model based on
user-annotated regions, and to classify the remaining pixels. This is the same
principle used by well-established image segmentation software such as
- [The trainable Weka segmentation Fiji plugin](https://imagej.net/Trainable_Weka_Segmentation)
- [ilastik](https://www.ilastik.org/), an interactive learning and segmentation
  desktop application.

With the different libraries of the scientific Python ecosystem, such as
[scikit-image](https://scikit-image.org/) and [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/),
and [Dash](https://dash.plotly.com/) to build an interactive app in pure
Python, it is possible to build a highly-customizable app which you can
integrate into your specific workflow. And all in Python! 

## Image annotation and feature selection

In machine learning, a sample is represented as a vector of *features*. Deep
learning models learn features directly from the data and are very popular for
image processing. Nevertheless, they require a large training set and their

> training is very resource-intensive. We use instead local features representing
> for each pixel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
training is very resource-intensive. We instead use local features which, for each pixel, represent
```

- the average intensity in a small region around the pixel
- the average magnitude of gradients in the same region

> - and measures of local texture in this region

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- measures of local texture in this region
```

Such features are computed by first convolving the image of interest with a Gaussian

> kernel, and then measuring the local intensity, gradient intensity, or the

Reviewer: perhaps clarify what intensity you are referring to, e.g., "color intensity"?

eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix. Conveniently, these operations are provided
by the [`filters` module of `scikit-image`](https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/api/skimage.filters.html) and are relatively fast, since they
operate on local neighbourhoods. 

```python
import numpy as np
from skimage import filters

def _singlescale_basic_features(img, sigma, intensity=True, edges=True,
                                texture=True):

>     """Features for a single value of the Gaussian blurring parameter ``sigma``
>     """

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    """
    Features for a single value of the Gaussian blurring parameter ``sigma``
    """
```

    features = []
    img_blur = filters.gaussian(img, sigma)
    if intensity:
        features.append(img_blur)
    if edges:
        features.append(filters.sobel(img_blur))
    if texture:
        H_elems = [
            np.gradient(np.gradient(img_blur)[ax0], axis=ax1)
            for ax0, ax1 in combinations_with_replacement(range(img.ndim), 2)
        ]
        eigvals = feature.hessian_matrix_eigvals(H_elems)
        for eigval_mat in eigvals:
            features.append(eigval_mat)
    return features
``` 

These local features can be computed for each color channel of the image and
for different scales `sigma`. Large `sigmas` are useful to capture variations
characteristic of textures but they will make it harder to classify pixels
lying close to the boundary between objects. Users can modify the set of
features in a control panel thanks to interactive elements from
[dash-core-components](https://dash.plotly.com/dash-core-components): 
a checklist for the type of features and a range

> slider for the sigma parameter. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slider for the `sigma` parameter. 
```

![screenshot of app showing image and control panel](/assets/trainable_segmentation_panel.png)

> In order to build the training set, we use the [new shape drawing capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the training set, we use the [new shape drawing capabilities
```
Then the later "in order to" is not repetitive.

of plotly.py](https://eoss-image-processing.github.io/jekyll/update/2020/05/06/shape-drawing.html)
and in particular the `drawopenpath` dragmode which can used to draw

> "squiggles" on parts of the image which you want to label. In order to optimize
> the annotation time, the width of the squiggle is adjusted with a Dash
> `dcc.Slider`. Each time a new annotation is drawn, it is [captured thanks to a
> relayoutData event of the plotly figure which triggers a callback](https://dash.plotly.com/interactive-graphing).

Reviewer: At first reading it sounds like the width of the stroke influences the computation time, but you mean that it makes annotation faster by being able to cover more of the image with a wider stroke? How about:
```suggestion
"squiggles" on parts of the image which you want to label. The width of the squiggle can be adjusted with a Dash
`dcc.Slider` to make it possible to annotate features of different sizes. Each time a new annotation is drawn, it is [captured by the plotly figure's
relayoutData event, which triggers a callback]](https://dash.plotly.com/interactive-graphing).
```
(also just changed the wording a little bit to give it "anglo-saxon austereness" ;))

## Model training and prediction

> Features are extracted for the annotated pixels, and passed to a scikit-learn [Random Forest Classifier](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html). This estimator belongs to the class of [ensemble methods](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/ensemble.html), where the predictions of several base estimators are combined to improve the generalizability or robustness of the prediction. After the model is trained, its prediction is computed on unlabeled pixels, resulting in a segmentation of the image. It is possible to add more annotations to improve the segmentation if some pixels are wrongly classified. Furthermore, one can download the estimator in order to classify new images of the same type (for example a time series).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Features are extracted for the annotated pixels, and passed to a scikit-learn [Random Forest Classifier](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html). This estimator belongs to the class of [ensemble methods](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/ensemble.html), where the predictions by several base estimators are combined to improve the generalizability or robustness of the prediction. After the model is trained, its prediction is computed on unlabeled pixels, resulting in a segmentation of the image. It is possible to add more annotations to improve the segmentation if some pixels are wrongly classified. Furthermore, one can download the estimator in order to classify new images of the same type (for example, a time series).
```

## What's next?

> We hope you like this app. Suggestions are welcome, for example in the [source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you like this app. Suggestions are welcome, and can be submitted via the [source
```

repo](https://github.com/plotly/dash-sample-apps/) or [on Twitter](https://twitter.com/EGouillart). 

> There is an [open pull request in scikit-image](https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/pull/4739) to integrate into scikit-image the code in order to extract features, train the classifier and predict the class of unlabeled pixels. If the PR is accepted, the image processing code will consist only of calling two scikit-image functions, which parameters correspond directly to the elements of the user interface in the Dash application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is an [open pull request in scikit-image](https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/pull/4739) to integrate the code into scikit-image in order to extract features, train the classifier and predict the class of unlabeled pixels. If the PR is accepted, the image processing code will consist only of calling two scikit-image functions, whose parameters correspond directly to the elements of the user interface in the Dash application.
```
